The understanding which understands conditioned realities is conditioned.

Realities arise beyond our expectation.

What reality appears now?

Results for whom?

We live in the dark world, only one world is bright.

We cannot select our way of life.

Sitting covers up the true nature of reality.

Clinging to a special place is an aspect of taking realities for self

Live alone with sati, aware of visual object as visual object.

When there is awareness, there is no thinking of far or near objects.

Seeing sees visible object. What is seen is not a person. We have attachment to individuals, but individuality has no separate characteristic.

Can you tell what is beyond this moment?

What is experienced is hardness, not a table, but it has to be known by developed understanding.

Always wanting the other, not the dosa, rather than understanding the dosa as a conditioned reality.

Don't force yourself to think it is the right time and right place for the arising of awareness, because awareness can arise anytime or place. Don't limit it.

We must be brave enough to study with panna any reality. We need to be brave to begin to study visible object as visible object.

There are different conditions for different namas and rupas. With more understanding of different conditions you will see that there is no self.

When one thinks 'I am aware', it is not right awareness.

Right understanding is not in the text, it is at the moment of understanding what seeing is.

Never enough understanding, because each moment is conditioned.

No matter how much one thinks, one cannot eradicate the idea of self.

Do we hope for result for me?

Want to have conditions for the arising of satipatthana, waiting for the arising of satipatthana this is not the understanding of the development of sati. The moment of thinking it is not the moment of direct awareness.

When there are conditions for sati, sati will arise.

Colour arises but doesn't appear if there is no seeing.

We cannot call back any reality.

It is conditioned, it is unavoidable, uncontrollable.

We have the illusion of control all our life except at the moment of sati. It helps to eradicate that illusion.

Seeing is conditioned, pleasant feeling is conditioned. It has its own conditions already. We shouldn't prepare any other conditions for any reality to arise.

Nobody can condition any reality.

The more one wants to have panna, the more one sees that it's only wishing or wanting, it's not the right cause for the arising of panna. The right cause for the arising of panna must be learning, studying, considering. There can be awareness at anytime by sankhara khanda conditioning it, not by one's wish.
