Corrections Cetasikas. 

The old page 44 of book (and of Alan’s edition, p.51) which follows:

Every cetanā which arises, no matter whether it accompanies
kusala citta, akusala citta, vipākacitta or kiriyacitta, has to
coordinate the tasks of the other dhammas it accompanies.
The cetanā which accompanies kusala citta and akusala citta has, in
addition to coordinating, another task to perform: 'willing' or
'activity of kamma'@footnote{āyūhana which means 'striving' or
pursuing, is translated in the English text of the Atthasālinī as
conation, and in the English text of the Visuddhimagga as
accumulation.}. According to the @emph{Atthasālinī}, as to activity in
moral and immoral acts, cetanā is exceedingly energetic whereas the
accompanying cetasikas play only a restricted part. Cetanā which
accompanies kusala citta and akusala citta coordinates the work of the
other cetasikas it arises together with and it 'wills' kusala or
akusala, thus, it makes a ``double effort''. The @emph{Atthasālinī}
compares the double task of cetanā to the task of a landowner who
directs the work of his labourers, looks after them and also takes
himself an equal share of the work. He doubles his strength and
doubles his effort. Even so volition doubles its strength and its
effort in moral and immoral acts.

As regards the manifestation of cetanā which is directing, the
@emph{Atthasālinī} compares cetanā with the chief disciple who recites
his own lessons and makes the other pupils recite their lessons as
well, with the chief carpenter who does his own work and makes the
other carpenters do their work, or with the general who fights himself
and makes the other soldiers take part in the battle, ``@dots{}for
when he begins, the others follow his example. Even so, when volition
starts work on its object, it sets associated states to do each its
own.``

The cetanā which accompanies vipākacitta and kiriyacitta merely
coordinates the tasks of the other dhammas it accompanies, it does not
'will' kusala or akusala and it does not motivate wholesome or
unwholesome deeds. For example, seeing-consciousness, which is
vipākacitta, the result of kamma, is accompanied by cetanā and this
cetanā is also vipāka. The cetanā which accompanies
seeing-consciousness directs the tasks which the accompanying dhammas
have to fulfil with regard to visible object. It directs, for example,
phassa which contacts visible object, vedanā which feels and saññā
which marks and remembers visible object.

Cetanā which accompanies kusala citta or akusala citta has a double
task, it is 'exceedingly energetic'. Apart from coordinating the
other dhammas, it 'wills' kusala or akusala and when it has the
intensity to motivate a deed through body, speech or mind, it is
capable of producing the result of that deed later on.

-----------
Correction of old page 44 of book:
 Every cetanā which arises, no matter whether it accompanies
kusala citta, akusala citta, vipākacitta or kiriyacitta, has to
coordinate the tasks of the other dhammas it accompanies. The
@emph{Atthasālinī} compares cetanā with the chief disciple who recites
his own lessons and makes the other pupils recite their lessons as
well, with the chief carpenter who does his own work and makes the
other carpenters do their work, or with the general who fights himself
and makes the other soldiers take part in the battle, ``@dots{}for
when he begins, the others follow his example. Even so, when volition
starts work on its object, it sets associated states to do each its
own.``

The cetanā which accompanies kusala citta and akusala citta can be of the intensity to motivate wholesome and unwholesome deeds which produce their results accordingly. 
Kamma is actually cetanā cetasika. The cetanā which arises with each citta, with kusala citta, akusala citta, vipākacitta and kiriyacitta, and which coordinates the tasks of the accompanying dhammas, is conascent kamma-condition, sahajāta kamma-paccaya. The kusala cetanā and akusala cetanā that have the intensity of kusala kamma and akusala kamma that produce results are asynchronous kamma-paccaya, or kamma working from a different time, nāṇakkhaṇika kamma-paccaya.    
 When we speak about kusala kamma... (as is... p.45 above, end corrections) 

-----------
p. 47 of book, after quote, (and Alan’s edition p 55) erase: When kusala kamma patha is performed, kusala cetanā ``wills'' kusala,
and it also coordinates the tasks of the other dhammas it accompanies.
Kusala cetanā is capable...

Instead correction: 
When kusala kamma patha is performed, it is capable of producing...


p. old page 53 of Book ( and of Alan’s edition p 62) to be corrected:
 
When cetanā accompanies kusala citta or akusala citta it performs,
besides the function of coordinating, another function: it ``wills''
kusala or akusala and it can motivate a wholesome or an unwholesome
deed through body, speech or mind. Kusala cetanā and akusala cetanā,
which are actually @emph{kusala kamma}..
--------
correction on this page:

Kusala cetanā or akusala cetanā can be of the intensity of motivating wholesome or unwholesome deeds through body, speech or mind which
produce their appropriate results. In that case, kusala cetanā and akusala cetanā
are actually asynchronous kamma or kamma working from a different time (nāṇakkhaṇika kamma).
Kusala kamma and akusala kamma can produce...(as is) 
---------



---------- 
Correction on p. 83. 
Old p. 83:
The 'universals' have different qualities as they arise with different
cittas. For example, when kusala citta arises all the accompanying
cetasikas, the 'universals' included, are kusala as well. Vedanā,
feeling, which accompanies kusala citta can be pleasant feeling or
indifferent feeling. Cetanā, volition, which accompanies kusala citta
has a double function: it coordinates the tasks of the accompanying
dhammas and it 'wills' kusala. If it motivates wholesome deeds it is
capable of producing the appropriate result when it is the right time
for it. Thus, kusala cetanā is different from cetanā which accompanies
vipākacitta.

When the citta is akusala, all the accompanying cetasikas are akusala
as well. Vedanā which accompanies akusala citta can be pleasant
feeling (in the case of lobha-mūla-citta), unpleasant feeling (in the
case of dosa-mūla-citta), or indifferent feeling (in the case of
lobha-mūla-citta and moha-mūla-citta). As regards cetanā which
accompanies akusala citta, this has a double function: it coordinates
the accompanying dhammas on the object and it 'wills' akusala. If it
motivates unwholesome deeds it is capable of producing the appropriate
result when it is the right time. Ekaggatā, concentration or
one-pointedness, which accompanies akusala citta is different from
ekaggatā which accompanies kusala citta. Thus we see that mental
phenomena which arise together condition one another. If we have more
understanding of the many different conditions for the phenomena which
arise, it will help us to see them as elements, not as a person, a
self.

-------
correction p. 83: 
The 'universals' have different qualities as they arise with different
cittas. For example, when kusala citta arises all the accompanying
cetasikas, the 'universals' included, are kusala as well. Vedanā,
feeling, which accompanies kusala citta can be pleasant feeling or
indifferent feeling.
Cetanā, volition, which accompanies kusala citta
coordinates the tasks of the accompanying
dhammas and if it is of the intensity of kusala kamma patha, it produces its appropriate result. 
When the citta is akusala, all the accompanying cetasikas are akusala
as well. Vedanā which accompanies akusala citta can be pleasant
feeling (in the case of lobha-mūla-citta), unpleasant feeling (in the
case of dosa-mūla-citta), or indifferent feeling (in the case of
lobha-mūla-citta and moha-mūla-citta). As regards cetanā which
accompanies akusala citta, this coordinates
the accompanying dhammas on the object and it if it is of the intensity of akusala kamma patha, it produces its appropriate result. 
 Ekaggatā, concentration or one-pointedness, which accompanies akusala citta is different from
ekaggatā which accompanies kusala citta. Thus we see that mental
phenomena which arise together condition one another. If we have more
understanding of the many different conditions for the phenomena which
arise, it will help us to see them as elements, not as a person, a
self.

@subsection Questions (as is..)

--------


old p. 291:
There are many degrees of kusala and, thus, there are many degrees of
moral shame and fear of blame. The more we see the impurity of akusala
and realize its danger, the more moral shame and fear of blame will be
developed; they will abhor even akusala which is more subtle.

------
correction: 

There are many degrees of kusala and, thus, there are many degrees of
moral shame and fear of blame. The more paññā sees the impurity of akusala
and realizes its danger, the more moral shame and fear of blame will be
developed; they will abhor even akusala which is more subtle.
--------

